---
title: 'Quarantine Day 259: Princeton CS Senior Takes the AP CS Exam for the First Time'
date: '2020-11-28T03:16:38Z'
template: 'post'
draft: false
slug: 'ap-cs-exam'
tags:
  - 'Opinion'
description: 'Did I get a 5? My 3x ex-Facebook, ex-Google, ex-Airbnb, ex-boyfriend grades it'
socialImage: ''
minutes: '5'
category: 'wow im so bored'
---

When I was a high school senior, my school offered Honors Coding for the first time. Belmont High didn't have AP CS until after I graduated.

Coding H was a joke of a class that culminated in a final Arduino project. Mine was a "robot" that played one of three Christmas jingles depending on how loud you screamed at it.

I honestly didn't see CS as an interesting major/career path at that time. 4 years later -- I run a tech blog and will be a full-time SWE post-grad?

So for shits and gigs, I decided I would take the [AP Computer Science A Exam](https://apstudents.collegeboard.org/courses/ap-computer-science-a) with zero preparation.

## Expectations

I took Princeton's [COS 126](https://registrar.princeton.edu/course-offerings/course-details?courseid=002051&term=1214) -- Computer Science: An Interdisciplinary Approach -- my freshman fall. I'm imagining the AP CS exam to cover most of the material from this course.

From my understanding, the exam is only in Java. Despite Java still being listed on my resume under Skills > Languages, I have not touched it in almost two years 🤭 There's a [Java Quick Reference](https://apstudents.collegeboard.org/ap/pdf/ap-computer-science-a-java-quick-reference_0.pdf) page that is allowed during the exam. Skimming over it, these methods look vaguely familiar. I am not brushing up on Java syntax or properties, and have not looked at a single example question before I take the exam.

The format is as such -- both sections are weighted 50% and 90 minutes each:

- 40 multiple choice
- 4 free response

I found a [full practice exam](http://compscimadison.weebly.com/uploads/5/8/7/4/58741529/ap-computer-science-a-2014-practice-exam.pdf) that I'll take. I'll be typing into the pdf and making comments as I go to avoid printing 68 pages.

## Exam Day

## Results

## Reflections

## Conclusion
